>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, FEBRUARY 22: THE
HEAD OF HOMELAND SECURITY WARNS
MALL SHOPPERS TO BE VIGILANT IN
THE FACE OF TERROR THREATS FROM
MILITANT GROUPS OVERSEAS.
>> I WOULD SAY THAT IF ANYONE IS
PLANNING TO GO TO THE MALL
OF AMERICA TODAY, THEY'VE GOT
TO BE PARTICULARLY CAREFUL.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT WALMART'S
DECISION TO RAISE WAGES MIGHT
MEAN FOR THE REST OF THE U.S.
ECONOMY.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
THE POOR STRUGGLING TO STAY WARM
DURING THIS HARSH WINTER.
>> I HAVE TO DECIDE TO BUY
MEDICINES, OR FEED MY
GRANDDAUGHTER, OR PAY MY UTILITY
BILLS.
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS OF
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
AN INTERNATIONAL TERROR GROUP
LINKED TO AL QAEDA IS WARNING OF
ATTACKS ON SHOPPING MALLS IN THE
UNITED STATES, THE UNITED
KINGDOM AND CANADA, INCLUDING
THE MALL OF AMERICA.
THE WARNING WAS CONVEYED IN A
VIDEO RELEASED ONLINE BY AL
SHABAAB YESTERDAY.
THIS MORNING, ON CNN, HOMELAND
SECURITY SECRETARY JEH JOHNSON
URGED VIGILANCE, SAYING TERROR
GROUPS NO LONGER NEED TO RELY ON
PEOPLE TRAINED OVERSEAS TO COME
INTO THE UNITED STATES TO LAUNCH
AN ATTACK.
>> WE'RE IN A NEW PHASE IN THAT
THESE GROUPS ARE RELYING MORE
AND MORE ON INDEPENDENT ACTORS
TO BECOME INSPIRED, DRAWN TO THE
CAUSE...
>> AND THE INTERNET, THROUGH THE
INTERNET.
>> ...CARRYING SMALL-SCALE
ATTACKS ON THEIR OWN THROUGH
THEIR EFFECTIVE USE OF THE
INTERNET.
>> SO, HOW SERIOUSLY ARE YOU
TAKING THIS THREAT?
>> I AM VERY CONCERNED ABOUT THE
SERIOUS POTENTIAL THREAT OF
INDEPENDENT ACTORS HERE IN THE
UNITED STATES.
WE'VE SEEN THIS NOW IN EUROPE.
WE'VE SEEN THIS IN CANADA.
>> BUT SPECIFICALLY AGAINST THE
MALL OF AMERICA.
>> ANYTIME A TERRORIST
ORGANIZATION CALLS FOR AN ATTACK
ON A SPECIFIC PLACE, WE'VE GOT
TO TAKE THAT SERIOUSLY.
>> Sreenivasan: AL SHABAB
CLAIMED RESPONSIBILITY FOR A
MALL ATTACK IN NAIROBI, KENYA,
IN THE FALL OF 2013 THAT LEFT
MORE THAN 60 PEOPLE DEAD.
THAT MONTH-LONG STRIKE AT OIL
REFINERIES ACROSS THE UNITED
STATES HAS EXPANDED AGAIN.
EMPLOYEES AT TWO REFINERIES IN
LOUISIANA WALKED OFF THE JOB
LATE YESTERDAY, HOURS AFTER
WORKERS STRUCK AMERICA'S LARGEST
REFINERY IN PORT ARTHUR, TEXAS.
THE WORKERS, MEMBERS OF THE
UNITED STEELWORKERS, HAVE ALSO
WAGED STRIKES AT PLANTS IN
CALIFORNIA, INDIANA AND OHIO.
ECONOMISTS SAY GAS PRICES HAVE
CREPT UP IN SOME LOCATIONS AS A
RESULT OF THE WALKOUT.
OVERSEAS, MIXED SIGNALS FROM
UKRAINE.
PRO-RUSSIAN REBELS AND THE
UKRAINIAN GOVERNMENT FORCES
THEY'VE BEEN BATTLING BOTH SAY
THEY WILL HONOR THE NEW CEASE-
FIRE AND PULL BACK SOME OF THEIR
HEAVY WEAPONRY.
THE TWO SIDES EXCHANGED
PRISONERS YESTERDAY.
BUT AT LEAST TWO PEOPLE WERE
KILLED AND TEN WOUNDED TODAY
WHEN AN EXPLOSIVE DEVICE WAS
TOSSED FROM A CAR INTO A CROWD
OF PEOPLE AT A PEACE RALLY.
THIS AMATEUR VIDEO WAS OBTAINED
BY REUTERS AND IS BELIEVED TO
SHOW THE MOMENT OF THE ATTACK.
FIGHTING CONTINUES IN SOME
CITIES, AND THE UKRAINIAN
GOVERNMENT SAYS RUSSIA IS STILL
SENDING ARMORED COLUMNS INTO THE
REGION TO SUPPORT THE REBELS.
FOR THE FIRST TIME SINCE THE
CIVIL WAR BEGAN IN SYRIA NEARLY
FOUR YEARS AGO, TURKISH TROOPS
CROSSED THE BORDER BETWEEN THE
TWO COUNTRIES OVERNIGHT.
THE TROOPS, SUPPORTED BY TANKS
AND DRONES, RESCUED ANOTHER 40
TURKISH TROOPS WHO HAD BEEN
TRAPPED FOR EIGHT MONTHS BY ISIS
FIGHTERS.
THE RESCUED TROOPS HAD BEEN
GUARDING THE REMAINS OF THE
GRANDFATHER OF THE FOUNDER OF
THE OTTOMAN EMPIRE.
TURKEY CLAIMED THE SITE UNDER A
TREATY SIGNED IN 1921.
SYRIA DENOUNCED THE INCURSION AS
"BLATANT AGGRESSION."
FROM NIGERIA TONIGHT, WORD OF
ANOTHER SUICIDE BOMBING
INVOLVING A YOUNG CHILD.
AUTHORITIES THERE SAY A YOUNG
GIRL, POSSIBLY ONLY EIGHT YEARS
OLD, BLEW HERSELF UP AT A
CHECKPOINT OUTSIDE A MARKET.
SHE DIED ALONG WITH AT LEAST
FIVE OTHERS.
THE INCIDENT HAPPENED IN THE
NORTHEAST REGION OF THE COUNTRY
WHERE BOKO HARAM ISLAMIC
EXTREMISTS FREQUENTLY CARRY OUT
ATTACKS.
JUST WEEKS AGO, ANOTHER GIRL
CARRIED OUT ANOTHER SIMILAR
ATTACK THERE.
SHE WAS TEN.
THERE IS A SUSPECTED NEW LEAK OF
RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL AT THE
STRICKEN FUKUSHIMA NUCLEAR POWER
PLANT IN JAPAN.
AUTHORITIES THERE SAY THEY
DETECTED IT THIS MORNING AND
RESPONDED BY BLOCKING THE FLOW
OF WATER FROM THE PLANT INTO A
NEARBY BAY.
CONTAMINANT LEVELS WERE
INITIALLY REPORTED TO BE 70
TIMES ABOVE ACCEPTED LEVELS
BEFORE FALLING.
A MAJOR ART DISCOVERY: TWO
UNFINISHED SKETCHES BY PAUL
CEZANNE HAVE BEEN FOUND ON THE
REVERSE SIDE OF WATERCOLORS
ACQUIRED MORE THAN 90 YEARS AGO.
THE DISCOVERY WAS MADE BY
OFFICIALS AT PHILADELPHIA'S
BARNES FOUNDATION MUSEUM.
CURATORS SAY COLLECTOR ALBERT
BARNES LIKELY NEVER KNEW HE HAD
ACQUIRED, IN THEIR WORDS, "FOUR
FOR THE PRICE OF TWO."
AND LEGENDARY JAZZ TRUMPETER
CLARK TERRY HAS DIED.
TERRY PLAYED WITH BOTH DUKE
ELLINGTON AND COUNT BASIE, AND
LATER WAS FEATURED IN THE
"TONIGHT SHOW" BAND.
CLARK TERRY WAS 94.
♪
>> Sreenivasan: WALMART MADE
NEWS THIS WEEK BY ANNOUNCING
THAT IT IS RAISING THE WAGES FOR
ITS EMPLOYEES ABOVE THE FEDERAL
MINIMUM OF $7.25 AN HOUR.
STARTING PAY AT THE COMPANY, THE
WORLD'S LARGEST PRIVATE
EMPLOYER, IS GOING UP TO $9 AN
HOUR, AND $10 AN HOUR BY NEXT
FEBRUARY.
TO DISCUSS THE BROADER
IMPLICATIONS, WE'RE JOINED NOW
BY SHELLY BANJO.
SHE HAS REPORTED THE STORY FOR
QUARTZ, A BUSINESS SITE
PUBLISHED BY THE ATLANTIC MEDIA
COMPANY.
SO, HOW SIGNIFICANT IS IT?
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT ONE IN 100
PEOPLE EMPLOYED IN THE UNITED
STATES ARE EMPLOYED BY WALMART.
>> PRETTY SIGNIFICANT.
WALMART... AS YOU MENTIONED,
WALMART IS THE BIGGEST PRIVATE
EMPLOYER, AND SO, WHAT WALMART
DOES, OTHER PEOPLE TEND TO
FOLLOW.
>> Srennivasan: SO, IS THAT
SOMETHING THAT TARGET AND OTHER
SORT OF COMPETITORS MIGHT DO, AS
WELL?
>> A LOT OF COMPETITORS ARE
ALREADY PAYING MORE, SOMETHING
LIKE COSTCO OR SOME OF THE OTHER
RETAILERS.
BUT THERE ARE DEFINITELY
COMPETITORS LIKE TARGET, BEST
BUY, THOSE KINDS OF COMPANIES
THAT ARE LIKELY TO FOLLOW SUIT
AS THEY FIGHT FOR WORKERS.
>> Srennivasan: SO, WHY DID
WALMART DO THIS AT THIS
MOMENT?
ONE OF THE THINGS YOU POINTED
OUT IN YOUR STORY IS THAT NOW 29
STATES AROUND THE COUNTRY
ALREADY HAVE MINIMUM WAGES ABOVE
THE FEDERAL BASE.
>> RIGHT.
AND MY ARGUMENT WAS, WHAT TOOK
THEM SO LONG?
BECAUSE BASICALLY THEY HAD TO DO
THIS ANYWAY; THE TIME WAS
COMING.
AS YOU MENTIONED, 29 STATES
ALREADY HAD HIGHER STATE WAGES
THAN THE FEDERAL MINIMUM, AND
THERE'S A LOT OF POLITICAL
PRESSURE FROM WORKERS, FROM THE
GOVERNMENT, FROM THE STATES
THEMSELVES AND THE ECONOMY.
WAGES ARE RAISING, ESPECIALLY
FOR UNEMPLOYED WORKERS, NOT AS
FAST AS OTHER PARTS OF THE
ECONOMY.
BUT JOBS ARE GETTING... THE
UNEMPLOYMENT RATE HAS BEEN GOING
DOWN AND JOBS ARE GETTING MORE
COMPETITIVE.
>> Srennivasan: YOU KNOW, WAGE
STAGNATION HAS BEEN ONE OF THOSE
THINGS THAT ECONOMISTS HAVE BEEN
STRUGGLING WITH BECAUSE BASIC
ECONOMICS SAYS IF UNEMPLOYMENT
DECREASES-- MEANING THERE IS
LESS PEOPLE WITHOUT JOBS-- SO
THE DEMAND FOR THEM INCREASES.
AND THEY SHOULD BE GETTING PAID
MORE OR THEY SHOULD BE ABLE TO
COMMAND MORE, RIGHT?
BUT THAT HASN'T HAPPENED IN THE
PAST YEARS.
WHY NOT?
>> I THINK THAT'S WHAT'S
CONFOUNDING ECONOMISTS.
THEY'RE SEEING THE UNEMPLOYMENT
RATE GOING DOWN, THEY'RE SEEING
COMPETITION GOING UP.
BUT IF YOU TALK TO ANY
BUSINESSES, THEY'RE SAYING
"WE'RE HAVING A HARD TIME
FINDING GOOD PEOPLE," YET AT THE
SAME TIME THEY'RE KEEPING THEIR
WAGES LOW.
SO, MAYBE THIS IS NOW AN
EXPERIMENT SAYING MAYBE IF
WE BRING UP THE WAGES, MAYBE
WE'LL GET BETTER QUALIFIED
WORKERS.
>> Srennivasan: WELL, PLACES
LIKE THE CHAMBER OF COMMERCE OR
OTHER BUSINESS GROUPS ARE
USING THIS AS AN OPPORTUNITY
TO SAY, "YOU KNOW WHAT?
THIS IS AN EXAMPLE OF THE MARKET
AT WORK, THAT THE GOVERNMENT
SHOULDN'T BE CREATING A FEDERAL
MANDATE TO TRY TO ASK EVERYBODY
TO SAY $10.10 IS THE MINIMUM.
LOOK, WALMART DID THIS ON THEIR
VERY OWN."
>> AND I THINK THAT'S THE
POLITICAL GAINS THAT YOU GET OUT
OF THIS, BECAUSE ALL THOSE
BUSINESS GROUPS ARE THE ONES
THAT WERE COMING OUT AGAINST
RAISING THE MINIMUM WAGE.
THE NATIONAL RETAIL FEDERATION
WAS SAYING, "NO, WE SHOULDN'T
RAISE WAGES."
AND THEN, THE SECOND WALMART
SAYS "WE'RE GOING TO RAISE
WAGES," THEN ALL THOSE BUSINESS
GROUPS RALLIED AROUND WALMART
AND SAID "GOOD JOB WITH YOUR
DECISION."
SO, I GUESS IF WALMART CAN
HEAD THEM OFF BEFORE IT GETS
TO $10.10 BY OFFERING $9
THIS YEAR, THEN THEY SET THE
CONVERSATION.
THEY DECIDE WHAT THEY WANT
FOR THEIR BUSINESS.
>> Srennivasan: AND HOW MANY
PEOPLE DOES THIS ACTUALLY
IMPACT INSIDE WALMART?
I MEAN, IS... EVEN IF THEY GET
$9 THIS YEAR OR $10, ARE THEY...
DOES THIS INCREASE THEIR ABILITY
TO SPEND MONEY, COMPARATIVELY
SPEAKING?
>> YEAH, YOU HIT ON AN
INTERESTING POINT, BECAUSE ONE
OF THE BIGGEST PROPONENTS SAY
WALMART EMPLOYS 1.3 MILLION--
1.4 MILLION, DEPENDING IF YOU
INCLUDE SAM'S CLUB OR NOT-- IN
THE U.S.
SO, YOU PUT EXTRA DOLLARS IN
THEIR POCKETS, AND A LOT OF
THOSE PEOPLE ARE GOING TO SPEND
THAT MONEY BACK AT WALMART.
>> Srennivasan: ALL RIGHT,
SHELLY BANJO FROM QUARTZ, THANKS
SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW TO OUR
SIGNATURE SEGMENT, OUR ORIGINAL
REPORTS FROM AROUND THE NATION
AND AROUND THE WORLD.
TONIGHT, IN THE MIDST OF THIS
EXTREME WINTER, WE FOCUS ON A
PROBLEM THAT AFFECTS MILLIONS OF
POOR AMERICANS: FINDING THE
MONEY TO PAY THEIR HEATING
BILLS.
TODAY HAPPENS TO BE THE WARMEST
DAY IN A WEEK IN ASHVILLE, NORTH
CAROLINA.
BUT EVEN THAT FAR SOUTH, THE LOW
ON FRIDAY WAS 4 DEGREES, 3
DEGREES THE DAY BEFORE.
AND WHILE, FOR SOME HEATING
COSTS HAVE DECLINED THIS WINTER,
FOR MANY HEATING BILLS CONTINUE
TO PILE UP.
OUR SEGMENT TONIGHT IS PART OF
OUR ONGOING REPORTING INITIATIVE
ABOUT THE CAUSES AND EFFECTS OF
POVERTY IN AMERICA.
IN THE WEEKS AND MONTHS AHEAD,
WE'LL BE LOOKING IN-DEPTH AT
SOCIAL PROGRAMS THAT WORK AND
THOSE THAT DON'T, AS WELL AS
FOCUSING ON INNOVATIVE SOLUTIONS
FROM AROUND THE COUNTRY AND
ACROSS THE POLITICAL SPECTRUM.
WE CALL OUR SERIES "CHASING THE
DREAM: POVERTY AND OPPORTUNITY
IN AMERICA."
THE NEWSHOUR'S STEPHEN FEE HAS
TONIGHT'S REPORT.
>> Reporter: ASHEVILLE, NORTH
CAROLINA, A CITY OF 87,000
NESTLED IN THE APPALACHIAN
MOUNTAINS.
IT'S PERHAPS BEST KNOWN FOR
FARM-TO-TABLE DINING, FUNKY
BOUTIQUES, ARTHOUSE CINEMAS.
BUT BEHIND PALATIAL VACATION
HOMES AND CRAFT BEER HALLS, 20%
OF PEOPLE HERE LIVE BELOW THE
POVERTY LINE, OUTPACING STATE
AND NATIONAL FIGURES.
AND DURING THE WINTERTIME, WHEN
THE AVERAGE JANUARY LOW IS 27
DEGREES, LOW-INCOME FAMILIES--
SOME LIVING IN OLDER OR MOBILE
HOMES-- OFTEN STRUGGLE TO KEEP
WARM.
NINE YEARS AGO, AFTER BETTY AND
MIKE LANNING'S DAUGHTER FELL ON
HARD TIMES, THEY TOOK CUSTODY OF
THEIR INFANT GRANDDAUGHTER.
MIKE WAS A MECHANIC, BETTY
WORKED IN HOME HEALTHCARE.
>> I TOOK CARE OR PEOPLE, AND I
ENJOYED MY WORK VERY MUCH.
>> Reporter: IN 2007, MIKE DIED
IN AN ACCIDENT, AND BETTY WAS
LEFT TO RAISE HER GRANDDAUGHTER
RHIANNA ON HER OWN.
>> AFTER HE PASSED AWAY, IT WAS
A REAL STRUGGLE FOR ME.
I HAD TO DECIDE TO BUY MEDICINES
OR FEED MY GRANDDAUGHTER OR PAY
MY UTILITY BILLS.
>> Reporter: A SERIES OF
DEBILITATING MEDICAL CONDITIONS
LEFT LANNING, NOW 76, UNABLE TO
WORK.
HER ONLY INCOME: $1,100 A MONTH
IN SOCIAL SECURITY.
SHE STARTED GOING TO FOOD
PANTRIES, EVEN STOPPED TAKING
TWO MEDICATIONS TO SAVE CASH.
BUT AS THE WEATHER GOT COLDER,
LANNING KNEW SHE WOULDN'T HAVE
THE MONEY TO HEAT HER HOME.
>> I HEAT MY HOME WITH FUEL OIL,
AND IT'S VERY EXPENSIVE.
IT'S LIKE $3 AND SOMETHING A
GALLON.
SO, IF YOU GET 100 GALLONS OF
FUEL OIL, IT'S OVER $300.
>> Reporter: AND YOU BRING IN
THE INCOME FROM SOCIAL SECURITY,
WHICH IS $1,100.
SO, THAT'S A BIG CHUNK OF YOUR
MONTHLY INCOME.
>> YEAH.
>> WELL, CERTAINLY, THIS TIME OF
YEAR, HEATING IS ALWAYS AT THE
TOP OF THE LIST.
>> Reporter: THAT'S BILL
MURDOCK, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR AND
C.E.O. OF EBLEN CHARITIES.
EACH YEAR, EBLEN HELPS THOUSANDS
OF ASHEVILLE FAMILIES PAY BILLS,
PUT FOOD ON THE TABLE, AND, IN
WINTERTIME, STAY WARM.
YOU TURN ON THE TV, AND YOU HEAR
THAT THE ECONOMY IS GETTING
BETTER AND THAT GAS PRICES ARE
LOWER.
IS THAT HAVING AN IMPACT HERE
FOR LOW-INCOME FAMILIES IN
ASHEVILLE?
>> SO MANY OF OUR FAMILIES HAVE
BEEN STRUGGLING FOR A LONG, LONG
TIME, EVEN BEFORE THE ECONOMY
TURNED.
AND A LOT OF THEM ARE THE FIRST
ONES HIT WHEN SOMETHING HAPPENS
AND THE LAST ONES TO RECOVER IF
THEY EVER DO BECAUSE THEY'RE
DEALING WITH SO MUCH MORE THAN
WHAT A LOT OF US DEAL WITH.
>> Reporter: ON A RECENT JANUARY
MORNING, THE WAITING ROOM AT
EBLEN CHARITIES WAS FULL BY
9:00, AND MOST OF THE FOLKS WE
MET NEEDED HELP PAYING HEATING
BILLS.
HOW MUCH ARE YOU LOOKING AT?
>> IT'S $500 A MONTH RIGHT NOW
BECAUSE OF THE SPACE HEATERS.
>> Reporter: 40-YEAR-OLD JORGE
LONDONO HAS FOUR KIDS.
HE SWITCHED ON ELECTRIC HEATERS
THIS WINTER AND NOW HAS OVERDUE
POWER BILLS TOTALING MORE THAN
$1,000.
CECILIA LORDMAN GETS PAID THE
MINIMUM WAGE WORKING AT BURGER
KING.
ON HER SALARY, SHE AND BOYFRIEND
MIKE ROBERTS CAN'T AFFORD THEIR
$300 ENERGY BILL.
>> HER HUSBAND LOST HIS ONE JOB.
>> Reporter: JACKIE HENRY
BROUGHT HER 36-YEAR-OLD DAUGHTER
DEBRA WOLF TO EBLEN CHARITIES.
WOLF HAS FOUR KIDS AND OWES $417
THIS MONTH.
THE POWER COMPANY SAYS IT'S
READY TO SWITCH OFF HER
ELECTRICITY.
SO, WE MET SOME CLIENTS JUST
NOW.
SOME PEOPLE, IT LOOKS LIKE THEIR
HEATING BILLS ARE ALMOST HALF OF
WHAT THEY PAY FOR RENT.
YOU KNOW, WHAT KIND OF BURDEN IS
THAT PUTTING ON FAMILIES HERE?
>> WELL, IT'S A TREMENDOUS
BURDEN CONSIDERING THE ECONOMIC
TIMES, AND SOME WERE MAYBE NOT
WORKING, SOME MAYBE ON SOCIAL
SECURITY, SOME MAYBE HAVE TWO OR
THREE JOBS.
>> Reporter: IN NORTH CAROLINA,
LOW-INCOME FAMILIES ARE ELIGIBLE
FOR A RANGE OF GOVERNMENT
PROGRAMS TO HELP STAY WARM IN
THE WINTER.
GENERALLY, THEY'RE ADMINISTERED
BY THE STATE AND PAID FOR BY THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT.
BUT IN RECENT YEARS, FEDERAL
SPENDING ON PROGRAMS FOR THE
POOR HAS BEEN CUT.
SO, FOR EXAMPLE, THE FEDERAL
UTILITY BILL SUBSIDY ONLY PAYS
UP TO $400 A YEAR IN NORTH
CAROLINA; WE MET FAMILIES WHO
OWE MORE THAN THAT EVERY MONTH.
SO, INCREASINGLY, LOCAL
GOVERNMENTS ARE PARTNERING WITH
PRIVATE NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS
TO TRY TO FIND NEW WAYS TO HELP
POOR FAMILIES COPE WITH COOL
TEMPERATURES.
PHILLIP HARDIN IS ECONOMIC
SERVICES DIRECTOR FOR THE
BUNCOMBE COUNTY HEALTH AND HUMAN
SERVICES DEPARTMENT, WHICH
INCLUDES ASHEVILLE.
INSTEAD OF DIRECTLY DOLING OUT
FEDERAL HEATING DOLLARS, HIS
DEPARTMENT CONTRACTS WITH
NONPROFITS LIKE EBLEN CHARITIES
TO DO IT INSTEAD.
HE SAYS THOSE NONPROFITS OFTEN
HAVE MORE LATITUDE IN
DISTRIBUTING GOVERNMENT AID.
>> SO, THEY CAN COMBINE FUNDS IN
A LOT OF WAYS, YOU KNOW, THAT IF
THEY'RE ADMINISTERING THREE OR
FOUR DIFFERENT POTS OF FUNDS
FROM US THAT COULD HELP WITH
HEATING COSTS, THEN YOU MAY BE
ABLE TO PULL FROM MORE THAN ONE
FUNDING SOURCE.
>> Reporter: SO, THEY CAN
BASICALLY STITCH TOGETHER STATE,
FEDERAL RESOURCES, ALSO USE A
LITTLE BIT OF PRIVATE FUNDS AND
HOPEFULLY GIVE PEOPLE ENOUGH TO
PAY A BILL.
>> THAT'S ABSOLUTELY RIGHT.
YEAH.
I MEAN, THEY... AND THEN THEY
HAVE THEIR OWN FUNDING, AS YOU
MENTIONED.
YOU KNOW, THAT'S SOMETHING THAT,
FROM A COUNTY GOVERNMENT AGENCY,
WE DON'T GO OUT AND RECRUIT OR
SOLICIT DONATIONS.
>> Reporter: AFTER BETTY LANNING
CAME LOOKING FOR HELP, EBLEN
WORKED OUT A DEAL TO COVER HER
REGULAR HEATING BILLS.
GOVERNMENT DOLLARS COVER A
LITTLE MORE THAN HALF THE COST;
EBLEN'S PRIVATE FUNDS AND OTHER
DONATIONS, INCLUDING FUNDS FROM
THE LOCAL ENERGY COMPANY, MAKE
UP THE REST.
SO, DOES THAT BASICALLY MEAN
THAT GOVERNMENT ISN'T DOING
ENOUGH?
>> YOU KNOW, I DON'T KNOW IF I
COULD SAY THAT.
I'M CERTAINLY NOT ONE TO POINT A
FINGER AND SAY, "YOU'RE NOT
DOING ENOUGH," BUT I THINK
THERE'S A GREAT OPPORTUNITY
TO DO MORE.
NEEDS ARE ALWAYS GOING TO
OUTDISTANCE RESOURCES.
I THINK, SINCE THE BEGINNING OF
TIME, I THINK THAT THAT'S ALWAYS
GOING TO HAPPEN.
>> Reporter: PHILLIP HARDIN,
THOUGH, SAYS A PUBLIC-PRIVATE
MODEL MIGHT NOT WORK EVERYWHERE,
ESPECIALLY IN COMMUNITIES THAT
DON'T HAVE CHARITABLE
ORGANIZATIONS.
>> WHEN YOU GET INTO THE SMALLER
COMMUNITIES, THOSE PARTNERS
DON'T EXIST.
YOU KNOW, THERE MAY NOT BE BUT
ONE NONPROFIT IN SOME OF THESE
SMALLER COUNTIES,IF.
(LAUGHS)
MAYBE NONE!
>> Reporter: WHAT'S MORE, JUST
PAYING HEATING BILLS DOESN'T
SOLVE THE WHOLE PROBLEM IN
WESTERN NORTH CAROLINA, WHERE
MANY LOW-INCOME FAMILIES LIVE IN
DRAFTY OLDER HOUSES OR POORLY
INSULATED MOBILE HOMES.
>> WE TRY TO DO WORK THAT YOU
CAN'T REALLY SEE FROM THE
INSIDE.
>> Reporter: THAT'S WHERE GROUPS
LIKE COMMUNITY ACTION
OPPORTUNITIES COME IN.
THE NONPROFIT HAS SEVEN FULL-
TIME WEATHERIZATION
PROFESSIONALS ON STAFF WHO SERVE
FOUR COUNTIES IN WESTERN NORTH
CAROLINA.
THEY SEAL DUCTS, INSULATE DOORS
AND WINDOWS, AND INSTALL ENERGY-
EFFICIENT LIGHT BULBS TO HELP
FAMILIES STRETCH THEIR ENERGY
DOLLARS-- AT NO COST TO THE
HOMEOWNER.
TECHNICIAN JACK HEUER SAYS THOSE
SIMPLE MEASURES WILL SAVE NEARLY
$300 A YEAR FOR THE FAMILY
LIVING IN THIS SINGLE-WIDE
MOBILE HOME.
>> WE'RE ESTIMATING TO SPEND,
LABOR AND MATERIALS, CLOSE TO
$3,500.
>> Reporter: THEIR WORK IS ALSO
FINANCED WITH FEDERAL FUNDS, AND
THE GOVERNMENT REQUIRES ANY
IMPROVEMENTS TO BASICALLY PAY
FOR THEMSELVES AFTER 15 YEARS.
IN THIS CASE, THE PROJECT WILL
BE PAID FOR IN ABOUT 12 YEARS.
BUT FEDERAL RESOURCES FOR
WEATHERIZATION HAVE BEEN
TRIMMED, AS WELL.
AT THE HEIGHT OF THE FEDERAL
STIMULUS PROGRAM, COMMUNITY
ACTION OPPORTUNITIES HAD AN
ANNUAL BUDGET OF $3.9 MILLION TO
WEATHERIZE 200 HOMES A YEAR.
BUT TODAY, THE BUDGET'S DOWN TO
$1 MILLION, AND THE GROUP CAN
ONLY WORK ON 100 HOMES ANNUALLY.
AND WHILE THERE ARE NO FIRM
FIGURES ON HOW MANY HOMES NEED
INSULATING, THE GROUP SAYS ITS
WAITLIST HAS ONLY GROWN.
IN A TIME OF BELT-TIGHTENING,
BILL MURDOCK AT EBLEN CHARITIES
SAYS THERE WILL ALWAYS COME A
POINT WHEN GOVERNMENT ASSISTANCE
DOLLARS JUST DRY UP AND PRIVATE
NONPROFITS HAVE TO FILL IN THE
GAPS.
>> WE DON'T FEEL WE HAVE THAT
OPPORTUNITY OR THAT LUXURY, FOR
THE LACK OF A BETTER WORD, TO
SAY, "WE CAN'T DO ANYTHING,
SORRY, WE'VE HELPED YOU ALL WE
COULD," WHEN WE KNOW WE'RE GOING
TO GO HOME AND BE WARM TONIGHT
AND THEY'RE NOT.
>> FOR ONE WEEK, I HAD $20.
>> Reporter: BETTY LANNING
CREDITS BILL MURDOCK AND EBLEN
CHARITIES FOR KEEPING HER AND
HER GRANDDAUGHTER TOGETHER.
WHAT WOULD SHE DO WITHOUT THEM?
>> I DON'T KNOW.
I WOULD HAVE TO MOVE MY
GRANDDAUGHTER IN WITH SOMEBODY
OR... I DON'T KNOW HOW I WOULD
DO IT.
>> Sreenivasan: OF COURSE,
MILLIONS OF POOR PEOPLE ACROSS
THE COUNTRY FACE SIMILAR
CHALLENGES PAYING THEIR HEATING
BILLS.
HOW WIDESPREAD IS THE PROBLEM,
AND WHAT'S BEHIND IT?
YESTERDAY, WE SPOKE TO MARK
WOLFE IN WASHINGTON.
HE'S THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF
THE NATIONAL ENERGY ASSISTANCE
DIRECTORS' ASSOCIATION.
MARK WOLFE, HOW SIGNIFICANT IS
FUEL INSECURITY IN THESE WINTER
MONTHS?
>> WELL, IT'S VERY SIGNIFICANT.
THE AVERAGE FAMILY SPENDS ABOUT
2% TO 3% OF THEIR INCOME ON HOME
HEATING.
FOR A LOW-INCOME FAMILY, THOUGH,
THEY SPEND MAYBE 10% TO 15% OF
THEIR INCOME ON HOME HEATING,
AND THE REASON IS SIMPLE: THEY
JUST HAVE LESS MONEY.
SO THAT, IF YOU'RE POOR, IT
DOESN'T MEAN YOU USE LESS
ENERGY; YOU STILL HAVE A HOUSE
TO HEAT.
AND IF ANYTHING, YOUR HOUSE
MIGHT BE OLDER, MIGHT BE
LEAKY.
SO, YOUR BILL IS VERY HIGH
RELATIVE TO INCOME, WHERE, FOR A
MIDDLE-INCOME FAMILY, IT'S MUCH
LOWER.
SO, WE THINK ABOUT HOME ENERGY,
YOU HAVE TO THINK ABOUT JUST THE
BURDEN IT PLACES ON POOR
FAMILIES TO STAY CONNECTED TO
THE GRID AND TO CONTINUE TO BUY
HOME HEATING OIL.
AND THE PROBLEM IS THAT THE
ENERGY ASSISTANCE PROGRAM HAS
BEEN CUT FROM $5.1 BILLION IN
2010 TO ABOUT $3.3 BILLION NOW.
SO, WE'VE LOST CLOSE TO $2
BILLION IN ASSISTANCE TO HELP
FAMILIES.
>> Srennivasan: BESIDES THE
NORTHEAST OR THE MIDWEST, ARE
PLACES, SAY, FOR EXAMPLE, IN
THE DEEP SOUTH WORSE OFF BECAUSE
THEY DON'T NECESSARILY HAVE THE
INFRASTRUCTURE, THEY DON'T
PREPARE FOR IT LIKE THE
NORTHEAST DOES?
>> WELL, IT'S A LITTLE BIT
DIFFERENT.
HERE'S WHAT HAPPENS.
YOU KNOW, THERE'S FEDERAL
FUNDING THAT'S SORT OF BASE
FUNDING, WE CALL IT.
AND THEN, STATES' UTILITIES
ADD MONEY TO THAT.
MOST OF THE EXTRA MONEY THAT'S
ADDED TO ENERGY ASSISTANCE IS IN
THE NORTHEAST AND MIDWEST
STATES.
ALSO IN THOSE STATES, THEY HAVE
VERY STRONG SHUTOFF PROTECTION.
SO, YOU FALL BEHIND IN YOUR
BILL, SAY, IN MASSACHUSETTS,
YOU CAN'T BE SHUT OFF.
IT'S A PUBLIC HEALTH CONCERN.
AS YOU GO SOUTH, ESPECIALLY
THE SOUTHERN STATES AND THE
WESTERN STATES, THERE REALLY
ARE NO SHUTOFF PROTECTIONS
OR THEY'RE MUCH WEAKER.
SO, IF YOU'RE A LOW-INCOME
FAMILY, SAY, IN NORTH CAROLINA,
IT'S MUCH HARDER.
YOU FALL BEHIND IN YOUR BILL,
THE STATE HAS LESS MONEY TO
WORK WITH.
THERE IS FEWER UTILITY
SUPPORTS, AND THEY'RE MORE
LIKELY TO GET INTO A SHUTOFF
SITUATION OR FALL FURTHER BEHIND
IN THEIR BILL BECAUSE THERE'S
JUST LESS MONEY TO HELP THEM
WITH.
I MEAN, THIS IS NOT LIKE CURING
CANCER.
THIS IS A VERY, VERY
STRAIGHTFORWARD PROBLEM.
IT'S A BILL.
AND IN THE NORTHEAST AND MIDWEST
STATES, THEY HAVE MORE MONEY TO
WORK WITH THAN, SAY, IN THE
SOUTH OR WESTERN STATES.
>> Sreenivasan: OKAY, SO THIS
GETS INTO A LITTLE BIT OF THE
PHILOSOPHICAL QUESTION OF WHAT'S
THE ROLE OF GOVERNMENT AND
WHAT'S THE ROLE OF ASSISTANCE IN
POVERTY, RIGHT?
>> WELL, EXACTLY.
IN A SENSE, THERE'S A BROAD
AGREEMENT THAT PROGRAMS LIKE
SNAP OR FOOD STAMPS, MEDICAID,
THEY'RE ENTITLEMENT PROGRAMS IN
THE SENSE THAT IF YOU'RE
ELIGIBLE BASED ON INCOME, THERE
WILL ALWAYS BE MONEY TO HELP
YOU.
ENERGY ASSISTANCE IS A
DISCRETIONARY GRANT PROGRAM,
WHICH MEANS THAT WHEN THE
APPROPRIATION RUNS OUT, THE
PROGRAM ENDS.
SO THAT THERE'S A REAL
DIFFERENCE.
IT'S A SOCIETAL AGREEMENT TO
HELP PEOPLE WITH FOOD, TO
HELP OLD AGE... ELDERLY PEOPLE
WITH SOCIAL SECURITY.
THERE'S NOT A BROAD SOCIETAL
AGREEMENT TO HELP PEOPLE WITH
ENERGY, AND THAT'S THE REAL KEY
DIFFERENCE.
ONE OF THE OTHER DIFFERENCES IN
ENERGY, THOUGH-- AND THIS IS
WHERE I THINK WE GET INTO
THIS SITUATION OF FAMILIES
GETTING TO UNAFFORDABLE
CASES-- IT'S NOT JUST THE
PRICE OF ENERGY, IT'S ALSO
HOW MUCH YOU USE.
SO, IF THIS TURNS OUT... THIS
WINTER TURNS OUT TO CONTINUE
TO BE AS COLD AS IT IS, THEN
FAMILIES WILL JUST NEED MORE
MONEY TO PAY THEIR ENERGY
BILL, AND THERE'S NOTHING TO
HELP THEM.
THAT'S THE PROBLEM.
SO, THEY HAVE TO SUBSTITUTE.
AND LOW-INCOME FAMILIES BUY
LESS MEDICINE, LESS FOOD BECAUSE
THEY HAVE TO PAY THEIR ENERGY
BILL.
SO, IT'S A COMPLICATED
QUESTION, BUT WE'VE ANSWERED IT
IN THE AREA OF FOOD.
WE'VE ANSWERED IT WITH, IN SOME
CASES, IF YOU'RE LOW-INCOME,
GETTING HOUSING ASSISTANCE.
WE HAVEN'T REALLY ANSWERED IT
WITH ENERGY.
>> Srennivasan: ALL RIGHT, MARK
WOLFE, THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF
THE NATIONAL ENERGY ASSISTANCE
DIRECTORS ASSOCIATION.
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: HOW ARE SOME
AMERICANS COPING WITH HIGH
UTILITY BILLS THIS WINTER?
READ THEIR PERSONAL STORIES AND
SHARE YOUR OWN.
VISIT www.pbs.org/newshour.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SUNDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: A REPORT
PUBLISHED EARLIER THIS WEEK IN
THE MEDICAL JOURNAL "THE LANCET"
WARNS THAT MILLIONS OF PEOPLE--
PRIMARILY IN ASIA AND AFRICA--
ARE POTENTIALLY AT RISK FROM A
NEW STRAIN OF MALARIA.
IT'S RESISTANT TO ONE OF THE
MAIN DRUGS USED TO TREAT THE
OFTEN FATAL DISEASE.
I.T.V.'S SCIENCE CORRESPONDENT
ALOK JHA HAS OUR REPORT.
>> Reporter: MALARIA IS ONE OF
THE WORLD'S MOST DEADLY
DISEASES.
CAUSED BY A PARASITE SPREAD BY
MOSQUITOES, IT INFECTED 200
MILLION PEOPLE LAST YEAR ALONE
AND KILLED OVER 600,000.
VACCINES AND DRUGS THAT WERE
USED TO FIGHT THE PARASITE IN
THE MID-20th CENTURY SOON BECAME
USELESS AS THE BUG DEVELOPED
RESISTANCE.
A NEW DRUG, ARTEMISININ, GAVE
HOPE IN RECENT DECADES, BUT NEW
RESEARCH SHOWS THAT THAT, TOO,
IS LOSING ITS POWER.
>> WE NOW KNOW PART OF THE
MOLECULAR MACHINERY OF THE
PARASITE THAT WORKS TO OVERCOME
THIS DRUG.
>> Reporter: IN 2005,
ARTEMISININ-RESISTANT MALARIA
PARASITES WERE DISCOVERED IN
CAMBODIA.
IT'S NOW SPREAD INTO FOUR
OTHER COUNTRIES: LAOS; MYANMAR,
FORMERLY BURMA; THAILAND; AND
VIETNAM.
TODAY'S REPORT IN "THE LANCET"
SHOWS THAT THE RESISTANCE IS NOW
PREVALENT IN MYANMAR, AND CASES
HAVE APPEARED JUST 15 MILES FROM
THE INDIAN BORDER.
IF THE SPREAD CONTINUES AND
REACHES INDIA OR AFRICA, THE
CONSEQUENCES WOULD BE DIRE.
>> I THINK IT'S ABSOLUTELY
IMPERATIVE THAT WE GET ON TOP OF
THIS.
WE DO HAVE THIS EARLY WARNING.
NOW IS THE TIME TO ACT, TO
ACTUALLY TAKE ACTION AND MAKE
SURE THAT THIS DOES NOT SPREAD.
BECAUSE IF IT DOES, WE'RE GOING
TO SEE MILLIONS OF CHILDREN IN
AFRICA DYING FROM THIS.
>> Reporter: THE NUMBER OF
DEATHS FROM MALARIA HAS BEEN
FALLING IN RECENT YEARS, BUT THE
SPREAD OF ARTEMISININ-RESISTANT
PARASITES COULD EASILY REVERSE
THAT TREND.
ALOK JHA, I.T.N. NEWS.
>> Srennivasan: SOME MORE NEWS
BEFORE WE LEAVE YOU TONIGHT.
THE WINTER OF 2015 JUST WON'T
LET UP.
FRIGID TEMPERATURES ONCE AGAIN
ARE EXPECTED OVER MUCH OF THE
NATION TOMORROW.
AND BOXING GLOVES WORN BY
MUHAMMAD ALI AND SONNY LISTON
DURING ALI'S FIRST SUCCESSFUL
TITLE DEFENSE IN 1965 WERE
AUCTIONED THIS WEEKEND FOR
$956,000.
ON THE NEWSHOUR MONDAY, SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT MARTIN SEEMUNGAL
REPORTS FROM GAZA.
>> Reporter: IN PARTS OF GAZA,
WHAT WERE ONCE WHOLE TOWNS ARE
NOW PILES OF RUBBLE.
IT LOOKS LIKE AN ENORMOUS
EARTHQUAKE RIPPED THROUGH
HERE, BUT THIS IS ALL THE RESULT
OF THE FEROCIOUS SUMMER WAR
BETWEEN ISRAEL AND HAMAS.
MONTHS LATER, AND IT STILL
LOOKS LIKE "THE DAY AFTER."
>> Sreenivasan: THAT'S IT FOR
THIS EDITION OF PBS NEWSHOUR
WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.